new blog on upcoming changes for weighted graph models (#1259)
openfga/openfga.dev: blog/weighted-graph-upcoming-changes.md

**What is changing:** The weighted graph resolves this by making stored tuples the authoritative source of truth. Alias traversal is no longer performed during a check — what's stored is what counts. This makes access decisions deterministic and independent of how relations happen to be defined at check time.

```dsl
type document
  relations
    define reader: [user]
    define allowed: reader        # allowed is an alias for reader
    define viewer: [user, document#allowed]
```

```
# Stored tuple: {document:source#allowed, viewer, document:target}

check("document:target", "viewer", "document:source#allowed")
# ✓ Returns TRUE — matches what's stored

check("document:target", "viewer", "document:source#reader")
# ❌ Returns FALSE — the stored tuple only uses #allowed, not #reader
```

**Fix:** Check using the relation name that's actually stored in the tuple. If you need to check both names, store a tuple for each:

```
write(document:source#allowed, viewer, document:target)  # Already stored

> write(document:source#reader, viewer, document:target)   # Store explicitly

Reviewer: Copilot is right about this. The issue is that you can't actually define a tuple for the `reader` relation since it's not in the model definition. So we're no longer supporting check resolution calls against aliases for usersets.
```suggestion
```

---
title: "OpenFGA's Move to Weighted Graph Resolution: What's Changing"
description: "OpenFGA is transitioning to a weighted graph-based resolution algorithm. Learn what's changing, why, and how to migrate your models."
slug: weighted-graph-upcoming-changes
date: 2026-07-14
authors: tylernix
tags: [announcement, check, migration]
image: https://openfga.dev/img/og-rich-embed.png
hide_table_of_contents: false

> ---

Reviewer 2: All the other blogs have a:

last_update: { date: 'yyyy-mm-dd' }

# OpenFGA's Move to Weighted Graph Resolution: What's Changing

OpenFGA is continuing to roll out a **weighted graph-based resolution algorithm** across its core query endpoints — Check, BatchCheck, ListObjects, Expand, and ListUsers. ListObjects already runs on this updated algorithm, and Check is next. As a precaution, all core query endpoints currently fall back to the legacy algorithm for models that are incompatible with the weighted graph, but **that fallback option will be removed soon**. A date for the final changeover has not been set at this time. 

This post explains which modeling and check patterns are incompatible with the weighted graph algorithm, and how to migrate before the fallback is removed. 

<!-- truncate -->

## Why a Weighted Graph?

The legacy Check algorithm resolves authorization queries by recursively traversing relation definitions at *request time*. While functional, this approach has limitations:

> - **Unpredictable resource usage**: A shallow recursive graph can be more resource-intensive than a deep linear one, but the old algorithm used a fixed depth limit of 26 as its only complexity guard.

Reviewer 2: 26?  Or 25? https://github.com/openfga/openfga/blob/main/pkg/server/config/config.go

**What was broken:** The legacy algorithm would follow aliases in the model at resolution time by inferring they were equivalent and bridging the gap. The issue appears when subtly renaming a relation or restructuring an alias, silently changing what access checks returned.

**What is changing:** The weighted graph resolves this by making stored tuples the authoritative source of truth. Alias traversal is no longer performed during a check — what's stored is what counts. This makes access decisions deterministic and independent of how relations happen to be defined at check time.

```dsl.openfga
type document
  relations
    define reader: [user]
    define allowed: reader        # allowed is an alias for reader
    define viewer: [user, document#allowed]
```

```text
# Stored tuple: {document:source#allowed, viewer, document:target}

check("document:source#allowed", "viewer", "document:target")
# ✓ Returns TRUE — matches what's stored

check("document:source#reader", "viewer", "document:target")
# ❌ Returns FALSE (when it previously would return TRUE) — the stored tuple only uses #allowed, not #reader.
```

> **Fix:** Check using the relation name that's actually stored in the tuple. You will not be able to work around this by writing a tuple with the alias name anymore. Going forward, if the relation isn't in the type, the write will be rejected.

Reviewer: I don't believe you could ever write an alias tuple. It fails on `/Write` and that wasn't changed.

---
title: "OpenFGA's Move to Weighted Graph Resolution: What's Changing"
description: "OpenFGA is transitioning to a weighted graph-based resolution algorithm. Learn what's changing, why, and how to migrate your models."
slug: weighted-graph-upcoming-changes

> date: 2026-05-14

Reviewer: Need to update this

```suggestion
date: 2026-06-17
```

## What's Changing

### Model Build Errors

The following model patterns are incompatible with the weighted graph algorithm. Today, requests using these models fall back to the legacy algorithm. When the fallback is eventually removed, these models will fail to build and return a model build error.

#### 1. Missing Relation 

When a relation uses `relation from parent` and the `parent` relation allows multiple types, **every type must define the referenced relation**. Previously, a TTU was resolved at query time. If a relation didn’t exist, it would skip it and return no results (`allowed: false`). The new weighted graph builds the complete resolution graph at model build time. When the relation for a TTU doesn’t exist, there’s no node to connect, and the graph fails to build.

**Broken pattern:**

```dsl.openfga
type organization
  relations
    define member: [user]

type folder
  relations
    define viewer: [user]
    # ❌ Missing: member is not defined here

type document
  relations
    define parent: [organization, folder]
    define viewer: member from parent  # but folder has no member, only viewer!
```

> **Why this fails:** Access checks through `folder` as `parent` silently return `false` — users never get access even if they should.

Reviewer: This is a little inaccurate. Why it fails is because the weighted graph won't build a graph where all the nodes are not reachable, not because of a `false` returned during a check.
```suggestion
**Why this fails:** The weighted graph cannot build a graph with unreachable nodes. Since `member` does not exist on `folder`, when the `document.viewer` part of the graph attempts to reach all the `member` relations in `parent`, it fails and does not build.
```

```dsl.openfga
type group
  relations
    define blocked: [user, group#member]
    define member: [user, group#member] but not blocked  # ❌ Cycle with BUT NOT
```

**Why this fails:** To check if a user is a `member`, the system must resolve `group#member` (recursion) while simultaneously checking the `and`/`but not` condition — which itself depends on `member` resolution. This creates a circular dependency.

**Fix:** Split into a "base" relation (allows recursion) and an "allowed" relation (applies the access gate):

```dsl.openfga
type group
  relations
    define blocked: [user, group#member]
    define member: [user, group#member]              # Pure union recursion (allowed)
    define allowed_member: member but not blocked  # Exclusion at leaf level only
```

> **Migration impact:** Your existing `member` and `blocked` tuples stay exactly as they are — no tuple writes or deletes needed. The only change is in how your application calls Check: replace `check(user, "member", object)` with `check(user, "allowed_member", object)`. The new `allowed_member` relation reads from the same underlying data, just with the exclusion gate applied at the right level.

> 

Reviewer: This might be too in-depth for this article and better suited to a migration guide, but I just want to capture that some users might want to be able to express hierarchical blocked group membership. How can they do this if we no longer allow the above model? By moving the hierarchy into a TTU relation. Here is an example:

```
type group
  relations
    define blocked: [user, group#member]
    define blocked_in_hierarchy: blocked or blocked_in_hierarchy from hierarchy_edge
    define hierarchy_edge: [group]
    define member: [user, group#member]
    define allowed_member: member but not blocked_in_hierarchy
```

However, this would require tuple migration since any pre-existing `(group:X#member, member, group:Y)` relations would need to be rewritten as `(group:X, hierarchy_edge, group:Y)`, as well as changing their check calls from `member` to `allowed_member`. This gets a little complicated to explain, however, and might even require being in its own advanced modelling guide.

### Check Request Errors

#### 3. Userset or Wildcard Requests with Exclusion

Sometimes you want to ask "Does this whole group have access?" (i.e. Userset `document:contract#owner`) or "Does everyone have access?" (i.e. Wildcard `user:*`) by passing the group reference or wildcard as the user in a check call. However, when the relation being checked uses `but not`, OpenFGA can't reliably answer that question. To be sure, it would need to check every individual in that group or every possible user to confirm none of them are excluded. Rather than guess, it will return an **error**.

**Userset example:**

```dsl.openfga
type document
  relations
    define owner: [user]
    define member: [user]

>     define viewer: [document#owner] but not member

Reviewer: There's a mistake here, you need to add `user` in order for the example to work. Eg,

```suggestion
    define viewer: [user, document#owner] but not member
```

Author: Added

```

```text
check("document:contract#owner", "viewer", "document:report")
# ❌ Error — can't confirm every owner passes the exclusion
```

**Wildcard example:**

```dsl.openfga
type document
  relations
    define public: [user:*]
    define blocked: [user]
    define viewer: public but not blocked
```

```text
check("user:*", "viewer", "document:readme")
# ❌ Error — can't confirm no one in user:* is blocked
```

**Fix:** Check specific users individually instead:

```text
check("user:alice", "viewer", "document:report")  # ✓ — userset exclusion applied correctly per user
check("user:alice", "viewer", "document:readme")  # ✓ — wildcard exclusion applied correctly per user
```

> 

Reviewer: Note: This might be better suited to a migration guide, but we could also suggest that users leverage `ListUsers` here. Eg,

```
If you need to enumerate who actually has access, use ListUsers:

listUsers("document:report", "viewer") → [user:alice, user:bob]
ListUsers handles both userset and wildcard sources correctly, returning the concrete set of allowed users (with exclusions applied). Note that for wildcard-based relations, this set may be very large, therefore if your original intent was a yes/no "is this fully public?" question, consider modelling publicness as a separate exclusion-free relation rather than reasoning about the full user set.
```

**What was broken:** The legacy algorithm would follow aliases in the model at resolution time by inferring they were equivalent and bridging the gap. The issue appears when subtly renaming a relation or restructuring an alias, silently changing what access checks returned.

**What is changing:** The weighted graph resolves this by making stored tuples the authoritative source of truth. Alias traversal is no longer performed during a check — what's stored is what counts. This makes access decisions deterministic and independent of how relations happen to be defined at check time.

```dsl.openfga
type document
  relations
    define reader: [user]
    define allowed: reader        # allowed is an alias for reader
    define viewer: [user, document#allowed]
```

```text
# Stored tuple: {document:source#allowed, viewer, document:target}

check("document:source#allowed", "viewer", "document:target")
# ✓ Returns TRUE — matches what's stored

check("document:source#reader", "viewer", "document:target")

> # ❌ Returns FALSE — the stored tuple only uses #allowed, not #reader

Reviewer: To make this a little more clear, might want to reference that this used to return true.
```suggestion
check("document:source#reader", "viewer", "document:target")
# ❌ Returns FALSE — the stored tuple only uses #allowed, not #reader. Previously would return TRUE
```

```

> **Fix:** Check using the relation name that's actually stored in the tuple. If you need to check both names, store a tuple for each:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Fix:** Check using the relation name that's actually stored in the tuple.
```

```text
write(document:source#allowed, viewer, document:target)  # Already stored
write(document:source#reader, viewer, document:target)   # Store explicitly
```

> **Migration impact:** 
> 1. First, check whether your model has any relations that accept a group reference as a value — look for type lists that include `type:object#relation` (e.g., `define viewer: [user, document#allowed]`). If none of your relations accept group references, this change does not affect you. 

> > 2. If they do exist in your model, audit your check calls for any that pass a group reference as the user. Verify that the relation name in the check matches the relation name used when the tuple was written. If your application relied on alias inference — checking with `#reader` when `#allowed` was stored — update those calls to use the stored relation name, or write additional tuples to explicitly cover the names you check with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. If they do exist in your model, audit your check calls for any that pass a group reference as the user. Verify that the relation name in the check matches the relation name used in the model relation. If your application relied on alias inference — checking with `#reader` when `#allowed` was stored — update those calls to use the stored relation name.
```

#### 5. Self-Referential Usersets

> **What was broken:** Previously, asking "do the viewers of document A have access to document A?" like `check("document:A#viewer", "viewer", "document:A")`, the legacy algorithm always evaluated `TRUE`, just because the relation existed in the model, not because an actual tuple granted that access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**What was broken:** Previously, asking "do the viewers of document A have access to document A?" like `check("document:A#viewer", "viewer", "document:A")`, the legacy algorithm always evaluated `TRUE`, just because the relation existed in the model and the queried user id and object id matched, not because an actual tuple granted that access.
```

    define viewer: viewer from parent
```

```text
# Given tuple: (folder:f2, parent, document:d1)

check("folder:f2#viewer", "viewer", "document:d1")
# ❌ OLD: TRUE (the parent tuple exists and the schema connects them)
# ✓  NEW: FALSE (since no explicit userset tuple stores folder:f2#viewer as viewer of document:d1)
```

**Fix:** Check individual users instead of self-referential group references:

```text
check("user:alice", "viewer", "document:d1")  # ✓ Checks actual data
```

Or use ListUsers to discover who has the relation:

```text
listUsers("document:d1", "viewer") → [user:alice, user:bob]
```

> **Migration impact:** This self-referential userset pattern — asking whether a group defined on an object has access to that same object — is uncommon. Search your application for check calls  where the user field is a group reference and the object and the group reference share the same type and ID. If you find any, replace them with checks against specific users, or use ListUsers to find who actually has the relation.

---

## Timeline

**Now**: 
- ListObjects runs on the weighted graph algorithm, with a fallback to the legacy algorithm for incompatible models. 

**Next**: 

> - Check transitions to the weighted graph algorithm as default, also with a fallback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check runs on the weighted graph algorithm as default, also with a fallback.
```

> - Provide a CLI command `fga model validate` to test if your model contains any issues and needs a migration.

Reviewer: We don't have this yet, is the intention to communicate that we will have it? Should be more clear:

```suggestion
- A CLI command `fga model validate` to test if your model contains any issues and needs a migration will be coming soon.
```

> - Date announced for final deadline to migrate models before new versions of OpenFGA will only support weighted graph algorithm. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We will be announcing a final deadline for migrating incompatible models, after which new OpenFGA versions will only support the weighted graph algorithm.
```
